Evaluating Debezium in 2026 (#1254)
debezium/debezium.github.io: _posts/2026-05-06-what-alternatives-get-wrong.adoc

---
layout: post
title:  What Most "Debezium Alternatives" Articles Get Wrong
date:   2026-05-06 00:00:00
tags: [ community, news ]
author: ccranfor
---

If you've ever searched for Change Data Capture (CDC) solutions recently, you've almost certainly landed on an article with a title like "_Top Debezium Alternatives in 2026_" or "_Why We Moved Away from Debezium_.".

> These articles follow a familiar pattern: they list the same handful of criticisms, present their alternative solution, and move on.

Reviewer: I wouldn't refer to present alternative solution, that sounds like an account settling.

Author: I have two alternatives. What are your opinions?
> These articles follow a familiar pattern: they list the same handful of criticisms and recommend a different tool.

> These articles follow a familiar pattern: the same handful of criticisms appear again and again, often without any examination of whether they still hold today.

Reviewer 2: 2 sounds a little angry to me. I would go with (1) because it sound a little less annoyed. Still both sound quite angry. I don't like it much. Sorry. :pray:

Reviewer: These articles follow a similar pattern: they list the list of percieved issues and perphaps recommend a different tool.

We're not here to dismiss those articles entirely.

> Some of the concerns they raise were real at some point, but many of them are based on outdated or an incomplete picture of what Debezium actually is today.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some of the concerns they raise are real or were real at some point, but many of them are based on outdated or an incomplete picture of what Debezium actually is today.
```

If you're evaluating CDC tooling and making decisions based on that picture, you deserve an accurate one.

So let's go through the claims, one by one.

+++<!-- more -->+++

### Claim: Debezium Requires Kafka

This is one of the most common criticisms, and it's one of the most in need of correction.

**This claim hasn't been true for years**.

Debezium is a Change Data Capture (CDC) platform.

> Apache Kafka Connect is _one way to deploy Debezium_, and for teams that already run Kafka, it remains an excellent choice.

Reviewer 3: Worth a note on the rich ecosystem of Kafka Connect (sink) connectors you can tap into that way, as well as HA, history storage, etc. pp. I.e. don't feed into the narrative "Kafka is a burden", but rather line out the advantages.

But it's far from the only option.

https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/operations/debezium-server.html[Debezium Server] is a standalone, ready-to-run application that does not require Kafka at all.
It uses the same battle-tested and trusted Debezium source connectors to read changes from your database's transaction logs and streams them directly to a wide range of target systems: Amazon Kinesis, Google Cloud Pub/Sub, Apache Pulsar, Redis Streams, RabbitMQ, HTTP webhooks, and more.
One process.
No Zookeeper.
No Kafka brokers.

> No Kafka Connect cluster setup.

Reviewer 3: Punchy framing, but I think it needs rework. Zookeeper hasn't been a thing for many Kafka users for a while now, so that's a bit of a strawman. As for Kafka and KC, you also lose something when not using them (see above). The way I've always thought about DBZ Server is that it gives you connectivity with other streaming solutions (which ofc. will have their own operational toil).

https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/platform/index.html[Debezium Platform] takes this further, providing an operator-based deployment model that manages the full lifecycle of Debezium connectors, including configuration, scaling, and health management.
And again, all without requiring any Kafka ecosystem components.

The "_Debezium requires Kafka_" narrative persists in part because Debezium's architecture is Kafka-aware.
Many tutorials and articles were written during a period long before these new options were introduced, and are still indexed and widely shared.
However, it is not an accurate description of Debezium today.

> If you elect to choose an alternative tool specifically to avoid a Kafka dependency, it's worth asking whether you evaluate Debezium Server and Platform first.

Reviewer 2: I can't say what it is, but I feel like this sentence should have another tone too. Maybe more passive wording? wdyt?

Author: If you're referring to line 44, I can certainly see if there is a lighter way to make the point.

Reviewer 3: I think we need to be generally careful to not support any "Kafka is overhead" narrative, consciously or subconsciously. The Debezium Server angle should rather be that "Debezium also is available to you when using other streaming platforms".

### Claim: "Setup is complex and takes days"

Some articles claim that getting Debezium running in production takes days, or even weeks, and requires configuring multiple components before data starting moving through your pipeline.

Let's look at what a basic Debezium Server setup actually involves.

> A minimal `docker-compose.yml` for capturing changes from PostgreSQL and emitting them to a sink of your choice looks like this:

Reviewer: With docker composee cotaining only a single container you can also just use `docker` command directly. That could be other example using for example Google PubSub?

Reviewer 2: I'd still prefer the docker-compose way. It'll hopefully be closer to real deployment scenarios.

Author: Would there be any harm in showing both?

[source,yaml]
----
services:
  debezium:
    image: quay.io/debezium/server:3.5
    ports:
      - "8080:8080"
    volumes:
      - ./conf:/debezium/conf
    environment:
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_CONNECTOR_CLASS=io.debezium.connector.postgresql.PostgresConnector
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_DATABASE_HOSTNAME=your-db-host
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_DATABASE_PORT=5432
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_DATABASE_USER=debezium
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_DATABASE_PASSWORD=secret
      - DEBEZIUM_SOURCE_DATABASE_DBNAME=mydb
      - DEBEZIUM_SINK_TYPE=kinesis
      - DEBEZIUM_SINK_KINESIS_REGION=us-east-1
----

> That is the entire infrastructure.

Reviewer 4: > That is the entire infrastructure.
One container.
Configure your source connection and your sink destination, and you have a complete CDC pipeline.

That is the entire infrastructure: configure your source connection and your sink destination, and you have a complete CDC pipeline with one unit of deployment

One container.
Configure your source connection and your sink destination, and you have a complete CDC pipeline.

The honest caveat: configuring your _database_ correctly, enabling logical replication on PostgreSQL, configuring the correct `binlog_format` on MySQL, or setting up the LogMiner permissions on Oracle does require careful attention.
These steps are not unique to Debezium; any CDC tool that reads from transaction logs requires these exact same setups.
Debezium's documentation covers each database thoroughly.

The complexity argument conflates the inherent requirements of CDC (which any tool must address) with the operational overhead of Debezium specifically (which has been substantially reduced).
Those are different things.

> There is also a deployment path that alternative articles almost never mention at all.

Reviewer: From here on I think we should use wording "aletranitive article"

> There is also a deployment path that alternative articles almost never mention at all.

Reviewer 3: Is this meant as a lead-in into the next section? If so, needs some clarification like "let's take a look at this next". Right now, it feels very disconnected.

#### For Java developers: the Debezium Quarkus Extensions

> If you are already building Java applications, there is a fourth option that sidesteps the infrastructure question entirely: the **Debezium Quarkus Extensions**.

Reviewer 3: "Fourth"? So far we discussed Kafka and DBZ Server, what's the third one?

> These let you embed Debezium directly inside any Quarkus-based application, running CDC as part of your existing service rather than as a separate piece of infrastructure.

Reviewer 3: Needs a link and sentence about what Quarkus is.

> For Java developers, this is arguably the most natural entry point into Debezium that exists.

Reviewer 3: I don't know about this; it really depends on the use case, doesn't it. Like, if I want to stream events from Postgres to my datalake, going through a Java-based service probably isn't the natural choice.

Quarkus is already a familiar runtime with a rich ecosystem: dependency injection, configuration management, live reload in dev mode, native compilation with GraalVM if you need it.
Adding CDC to a Quarkus application is as straightforward as adding any other extension:

[source,xml]
----
<dependency>
  <groupId>io.debezium.quarkus</groupId>
  <artifactId>quarkus-debezium-mysql</artifactId>
</dependency>
----

From there, Debezium participates in the standard Quarkus application lifecycle.
Configuration lives in `application.properties`, alongside the rest of your application's configuration.
Change events are consumed as CDI events.
The entire Quarkus developer experience, including dev services that spin up databases automatically for local development, is available.

This matters for the "complexity" argument in particular.
The setup burden looks very different when Debezium is just another dependency in a project your team already knows how to build, test, and deploy.
There is no separate process to operate, no separate configuration format to learn, and no context switch between your application and your CDC pipeline.

> For teams building microservices in Java, especially those implementing the outbox pattern for reliable event publishing, the Quarkus extensions deserve serious consideration before reaching for a separate CDC tool.

Reviewer 3: Yes, that's a great point!

### Claim: "Debezium provides limited transformations"

This specific claim requires some nuance, because it's not quite what it seems and is tongue-in-cheek at best.

Debezium is deliberately designed as a CDC solution, not a transformation engine.
This is an architectural choice, not an oversight.
The philosophy is: do one thing extremely well, and compose cleanly with tools and abstractions that handle the next stage.

For transformation needs, Debezium's https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/transformations/index.html[Single Message Transforms (SMTs)] cover a lot of ground out of the box:

* Routing events to different topics based on content
* Extracting only the "after" state of a record (flattening the event envelope)
* Filtering events by table or operation type
* Masking or replacing sensitive column values
* Converting data types
* Adding metadata fields to events

> For teams that need heavier in-flight processing, such as complex joins, aggregations, conditional routing across multiple topic streams, the right answer is integrating Debezium with a stream processor like **Apache Flink** or **Kafka Streams**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For teams that need heavier in-flight processing, such as complex joins, aggregations, conditional routing across multiple change event streams, the right answer is integrating Debezium with a stream processor like **Apache Flink** or **Kafka Streams**.
```

Debezium exposes a rich set of JMX metrics covering connector status, transaction log position, event counts, processing rates, and lag.
When paired with **Prometheus JMX Exporter** and **Grafana**, you get production-grade observability with dashboards the community has built and shared.

This is a real setup step, and we will not pretend otherwise.
But the framing of "no monitoring" versus "requires a standard observability stack" matters.
The Prometheus and Grafana combination is the industry standard for monitoring Java-based distributed systems, and Debezium slots into that ecosystem naturally.

For teams running Debezium on Kubernetes, the **Debezium Operator** integrates with standard Kubernetes observability tooling, and connector health is surfaced through standard resource status fields.

And this is an area where the project is actively investing.
Debezium Platform is gaining native metrics and monitoring support, built in, not bolted on, so that operators will have first-class observability with the ability for Debezium to provide the entire stack for you.
That work is in progress, and it reflects the project taking this feedback seriously.

> "Flying blind" is not an accurate description of what users have available today.

Reviewer 3: This sounds a tad too defensive IMO.

### When the criticisms _do_ apply

We want to be direct about this, because credibility matters more than winning any argument.

If your situation looks like any of the following, the alternative articles may be pointing you in a reasonable direction:

**You need a fully managed service with no operational responsibility**.
Debezium is self-hosted.
You run it, you monitor it, you upgrade it.

> If you want to hand all that to a vendor, Debezium may not be the right fit, not because it's complex, but because that is not what it is.

Reviewer: Not exact, there are vendors that give you CDC-as-a-Service. In fact this is not somehting that Debezium should provide you. It would be the same as saying yes, criticism is right Qorkuas project does not give you PaaS environment.

Reviewer 5: And also Debezium Platform could then simplify this point

Reviewer 3: I mean, our own company offers this, via Confluent Cloud :) Ofc. this article isn't meant to be a sales ad, but pointing out the relationship between Debezium as an upstream OSS project (which can be self-run) and managed downstream services like Confluent's would be fair.

Author: What do you guys feel about 
> **You need a fully managed CDC-as-a-Service offering**.
> Debezium is an open-source project, not a hosted service.
> If your requirement is that someone else operate the CDC infrastructure for you, handling provisioning, upgrades, support, and SLAs, that's a different product category.
> 
> To be transparent, several managed services use upstream Debezium connectors in their offerings, including Confluent Cloud.
> The relationship between Debezium, an upstream open-source project, and the managed downstream services built with it is a feature of the ecosystem.
> Choose the self-hosted project if you want to run it yourself, or the managed service if you want someone else to run it.
> 
> Both are valid, and the criticism that "Debezium isn't a managed service" is really just a question of which layer of the stack you're shopping for.

Reviewer 2: Is this IBM (Cflt)/RH post or the OSS / foundation dev post? I think it should be 2 and then we should keep out naming those products in this post.
From my pov a separate page with Debezium managed services is acceptable and linking to such a page. But I would personally keep out product names if we don't want to end in the same situation as the posts that we were criticizing.

**Your team has no existing JVM or distributed systems operational experience**.
Debezium runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).

> If your operations team has no familiarity with that ecosystem, there will be a learning curve.

Reviewer: Can we refer to pydebezium engine as an example of no need to work with Java directly?

Reviewer 6: I'm afraid Chris' point about JVM knowledge still applies here, because you still need to run JVM and eventually do the troubleshooting (in case of integration with python, not so frequently used, I guess you would need to debug or at least report bugs more often than when you just run e.g. Debezium server).
Maybe I'd consider to mention here compiling Debezium into native executable using GraalVM to avoid installing and using JVM.

Author: I think we can work both of those in, as I think they both have merit.

Author: Does this fit what you two had in mind?
> **Your team has no existing JVM or distributed systems operational experience**.::
> Debezium runs on the Java Virtual Machine (JVM).
https://github.com/memiiso/pydbzengine[PyDebezium] makes it possible to consume change events from Python applications, and https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/integrations/quarkus-debezium-engine-extension.html[GraalVM native compilation] removes the need to install a JVM at runtime. +
> +
> Even so, the underlying engine is still a JVM-based system.
> When something goes wrong in production, and in any distributed system, eventually something will; troubleshooting and bug reporting will benefit from at least some familiarity with that ecosystem.
> If your operations team has none, there will be a learning curve.

### The bottom line

The "Debezium is complex, requires Kafka, and is hard to monitor" narrative was written about a version of the project that has meaningfully evolved.
Debezium Server provides a Kafka-free deployment path that can be up and running in minutes.
The container-based quickstart is genuinely quick.
Single message transformations (SMTs) handle a wide range of transformation needs, and you can use any existing Kafka ecosystem transformations even in Debezium Server without Kafka!
And the standard JVM observability tooling provides deep operational insight.

Whether you deploy via Kafka Connect, Debezium Server, Debezium Platform, or embedding with the Quarkus extensions, Debezium meets you where you are.

If you read one of these alternative articles and came here to verify the claims, we hope this has helped inform your decision.
If you'd like to try Debezium Server yourself, the https://debezium.io/documentation/reference/stable/operations/debezium-server.html[quickstart] guide is the fastest way to see what it actually looks like.

The source is open.
The community is active.

> And the architecture is significantly more flexible than what you may have realized.

Reviewer 2: Maybe pointing to the picture that other articles claim about Debezium is better here than pointing to the realizations of the reader? Or just summarizing that the presented options for running Debezium make a more flexible solution?

Author: I believe the latter is the better approach. I'd rather focus on giving the reader information, "hey, in case you aren't aware" mentality. At the end of the day, it's their decision, but we'd want them to be as informed as possible before making it.
